1901. CONGRESSIONAL RECORD-HOUSE. 3089 Holland Comp a ny may be transferred to the banks of the Clyde, - and another Am e rican invention probably become the property of a foreign Government. Th ere is no quest ion wh a tever, Mr. Speaker, concerning the merit of these submarine boats. All the officers of the Navy who have had any experience with them and who have seen them in o peration unite in saying that they are needed in the servi c e and that they are far more efficient than was anticipated. Now, as to their effici en cy Lieut. Nathan Sargent, the command­ ing officer of the U. S. S. Scorpion , one of the blockading squadron at Newport, says: The moral effe ct of an anticipated attack from the Holland submarine boat was great. Capt. William M. Folger (formerly Chief of Ordnance of the United States Navy ), now comm andi ng the battle ship Kearsarge, the flagship of the blockading squadron, says in his report: It is clear that the Holland type will play a. very serious part in future naval warfare. There is no doubt whatevel" that the ves sel at Newport can approach a turret shin unseen either by night or day. Her only danger is she may be run over herself by _picket or large vessel Rear-Admiral Farquhar, the present commander in chief of the North Atlantic squadron (formerly chief of yards and docks), which was blockading Newport, says, after witntssing the per­ formances of the Hollarut: The Holland impressed everyone with the idea that under ordinary cir­ cumstances she could always get in a. torpedo either day or night without being discovered. The Holland arrived at Newport June 24last, and Lieut. Harry H. Caldwell, then of Admiral Dewey's staff, was assigned to com­ mand her. The annual report of Commander N. E. Mason, in charge of the torpedo station, says, under date of September 1, 1900: Up to the present date the boat has made 10 runs entirely under the con­ tr ol of the Navy crew. Under date of September 27 last, Lieutenant Caldwell makes a leng thy report, and, among other things, says: She (the Holland) is in excellent condition. There have been many minor a ccidents, but, I think, fewer than on the ordinary torpedo boats. Commander N. E. Mason, U.S.N., makes a lengthy report on October 1, in which he says: In my opin ion the Holland has been a grand success so far, and for some time the naval crew have had entire charge of her, under command of Lieu­ tenant Caldwell, running and working her both night and day without the presence of any of the Holland experts. Having made several dives in the boat myself with the naval crew alone, I am of the opinion that they are competent in every way to ma.neu¥er and manjpulate the boat successfully. During the late combined maneuvers of the flee~ shore defenses, and the torpedo flotilla, the Holland made a successful attack on the fleet at night by herself, without convoy, at a distance of 7 miles out from the mouth of the harbor, and with the naval crew alone in her. Here is what Admiral Dewey says in a letter to Senator STEW­ ART: Replying to the first of the questions which y:m propound, viz, whether or not in view of the favorable reports made by officers of the Navy upon the U. S. S. Holland since she has been in the possession of the Government, I agree with those officersastothegreat value of thi"' type of boats for harbor and coast defense, I have to state that I do, and that my opinion as to its value has not changed since my testimony before the House Committee on Naval Affairs in April last . What did Admiral Dewey say at that time? Let me read it: Gentlemen, I saw the operation of the boat down off .Mount Vernon the oth e r day. Several members of this committee were there. I think we were all very much impressed with its performance . My aid, Li e utenant Cald­ well, was on board. He could tell, if nece ssar y, what was done from the in­ sid fl . The boat did everything that the owners proposed to do. And I said th en , and I have said it since, that if they had had two of those things in Ma­ nila Bay, I never could ha>e held it with the squadron I had. The moral effect-to my mind it is infinitely superior to mines or tor ­ pedoes or anything of the kind . Witll those craft movina under water it would wear people out. With two of those in Galveston, all the navies of the world could not blockade that place. I agree with the resolution of Mr. CmrniNOS. I think it would be money well spent. I think it would tend to keep peace. 'l'hat is what we want a navy for. We want peace. And, Mr. Speaker, if we can have peace with three submarine boats, at an expense of $500,000, as against four battle ships and cruisers at an expense of over $20,000,000, I say, in God's name, and in the name of the taxpayer, take the submarine boats. Here let me read extracts from a letter from Lieutenant Cald­ well, formerly of Dewe y's staff, now in command of the Holland. It was written on January 12, 1901, to my colleague on the com­ mittee, the Hon. R. B. HAWLEY. He says: The HoUand has been undAr my charge from June 25, 1900, to the present time. Her longest submerged run was about l r miles. I consider her dura­ ble, habitable, and relia ble as a. vessel of war for coast and harbor defense. During the late combined maneuvers of the fleet, shore defenses, and the torpedo flotilla the Holland made a successful attack upon the fleet at night by herself, without convoy, at a distance of 7 miles out from the mouth of the harbor and with the naval crew alone in her. The Holland was under my command. She left the torpedo station at sundown and was placed in a partially submerged condition, with the turret and about 6 inches of the hull above water, ready to dive at short notice. Cruised in this condition to south­ ward and eastward of Brentons R-eef light-ship. Sighted two vessels of XXXIV-194 blookadingfleet and fired .torpedo signal at them. but was not answered, and thev disappeared before I could ascertain their identity. About 9 p. m., about 7 miles south-southeast from harbor entrance, sighted U . S. S. Kearsa :rge within range and fired torpedo signal. Fo~owed her and, getting within 100 yards without being discover e d, showed light, hailed her. and informed her commanding officer that she had been tor ­ pedo ed . The Holland was not seen by any vessel of the blockading fleet or t o rp edo boat, allhough she was within torpedo range of three of the former and !'e >eral of the lat U> r. I consider tllat the attack was a success, because the HoUand could in all probability have torpedoed three blockading vessels withon t being- discovered. I beli eve that I could sink one or more vessels of a blockading fleet or else make them keep so far away as to make the blockadA ineffective. With six of the Holland boats under my command, having trained crews composed of American men and officered by men of my own selection, I be ­ lieve I co uld break a blockade of New York City made by 15 ships of war. I would do it by direct ni g ht attacks, approaching the fleet from different di­ r ections m partially submerged condition and diving when discovered. If the fleet kept underway, by lying in wait at different points of its course or accompanymg a decoy b locka de runner. Such, Mr. Speaker, is the opinion of officers who are in charge of the boat and who are entil·ely conversant with its merits. Mr. GAINES. How much do these boats cost? M .r. CUMMINGS. A hundred and seventy thousand dollars each. And right here let me talk to you upon this question of cost. Mr. HOPKINS. \Vhat does the Secretary of the Navy say upon that·~ Mr. CUMMINGS. The price is made by the Secretary of the Navy, but limited to $170,000. I read an extract from a report of the Board of Construction sent to Chairman Foss, dated January 2, 1 !:00 . It says: AB regards the cost of the present boats, namely, $170,0CoQ each, the board is of the opinion that if the cost of construction, with a reasonable profit to the co ntractors. i."' alone considered, it is a. very high price; but if the ex­ penses of the company in developing the boat are taken into consideration, the price is not es:.cessive. Now, as to the question of desirability, the Secretary of the Navy, on January 9, lSOl, also gave the chairman of the com· mittee information on that point. He said: The question with the Department is not so much the desirability of sub­ marine boats. Thi"' may be regarded as largely settled by the fact that one is now in commission and ha.s given promise of great possible efficiency, and that seven more have been authorized by act of Congress and are now in proc­ ess o r construction. This speaks for itself and indicates that the Secretary is in ac· cord with Admiral Dewey. Mr. WM. ALDEN SMITH. Will the gentleman allow me to ask him a question? Mr. CUMMINGS. Certainly. Mr. WM. ALDEN SMITH. I see in looking over the testimony that was taken by the Committee on Naval Affairs that Admiral Hichborn said in answer to a question of Mr. VANDIVER whether he con~dered the Holland boat improved, he answered, "Yes, sir; the Holland to -day is an improvement on anything that has ever been built in the history of the world;" and fm·ther on, I think that in reply to a quest ion of the gentleman from New York Admiralllichborn replied that he regarded it as the most suc­ cessful weapon that could be put in the hands of the Americ..'ln Navy. Mr. CUMMINGS. That is true. I was about to call attention to it. Mr. GAINES. Mr. Speaker, I am informed that the Govern- ment already owns either six or eight of these vessels. Mr. CUMMINGS. It is building seven; it owns one. M.r. GAINES. Where a re they? Mr. CUMMINGS. The seven boats, or six boats, will be com· pleted according to contract in the time agreed to, and be here in Washington during the latter part of April, and this amendment of the Senate simply provides that if they fulfill the requirements and are satisfactory to the Secretary of the Navy he shall build three more. Mr. CANNON. How long does it take one of the shipyards to build one of these boats, under a stress? Mr. CUMMINGS. Nine or ten months. Mr. CANNON. Ordinarily, or working under a stress? Mr. CUMMINGS. I do not think you can bnild one of them in le s~han nine months, possibly seven. Now, here is the testimony of Lieut .. Commander Wainwright, Superintendent of .the Naval Academy at Annapolis: M.r. CUIDUNGS. You have the submarine boat at Annapolis? Commander WAINWRIGHT. Yes, sir. Mr. CUMMINGS. How long has she been there? Commander W AIXWRIGHT. About two months, I think. Mr. CUMMINGS . Have you had any experience with her. Commander W .AINWlliGHT. Yes, sir; I went down on her. We went out into the bay. 1\fr. CUMMINGS. How far? Commander W AJNWRIGHT. Out into deep water. Mr. CUMMINGS. Six or seven miles? Commander W A.INWRIGHT. Five or 6 miles. Mr. CUIDIINGS. How did she work? Commander W .A.INWRIGHT. Beautifully. I was very much surprised. I followed the boat for a good many years, the plans as they were growing,