1901. CONGRESSIONAL RECORD-HOUSE. 3089
Holland Company may be transferred to the banks of the Clyde,
- and another American invention probably become the property of
a foreign Government.
There is no question whatever, Mr. Speaker, concerning the
merit of these submarine boats. All the officersof the Navywho
have had any experience with them and who have seen them in
operation unite in saying that they are needed in the service and
that they are far more efficient than was anticipated.
Now, as to their efficiency Lieut. Nathan Sargent, the command-
ing officer of the U. S. S. Scorpion,one of the blockading squadron
at Newport, says:
The moraleffect of an anticipated attack from the Hollandsubmarine boat
was great.
Capt. William M. Folger (formerly Chief of Ordnance of the
UnitedStates Navy), now commandingthe battle ship Kearsarge,
the flagship of the blockading squadron, says in his report:
It is clear that the Holland type will play a. very serious part in future
naval warfare. There is no doubt whatevel" that the vessel at Newport can
approach a turret shin unseen either by night or day. Her only danger is
she may be run over herself by_picket or large vessel
Rear-Admiral Farquhar, the present commander in chief of the
North Atlantic squadron (formerly chief of yards and docks),
which was blockading Newport, says, after witntssing the per-
formances of the Hollarut:
The Holland impressed everyone with the idea that under ordinary cir-
cumstances she could always get in a. torpedo either day or night without
being discovered.
The Holland arrived at Newport June 24last, and Lieut. Harry
H. Caldwell, then of Admiral Dewey's staff, was assigned to com-
mand her. The annual report of Commander N. E. Mason, in
charge of the torpedo station, says, under date of September 1,
1900:
Up to the present date the boat has made 10 runs entirely under the con-
trol of the Navy crew.
Under date of September 27 last, Lieutenant Caldwell makes a
lengthy report, and, among other things, says:
She (the Holland) is in excellent condition. There have been many minor
accidents, but, I think, fewer than on the ordinary torpedo boats.
Commander N. E. Mason, U.S.N., makes a lengthy report on
October 1, in which he says:
In my opinion the Holland has been a grand success so far, and for some
time the naval crew have had entire charge of her, under command of Lieu-
tenant Caldwell, running and working her both night and day without the
presence of any of the Holland experts.
Having made several dives in the boat myself with the naval crewalone, I
am of the opinion that they are competent in every way to ma.neu¥er and
manjpulate the boat successfully.
During the late combined maneuvers of the flee~ shore defenses, and the
torpedo flotilla, the Holland made a successfulattack on the fleet at night by
herself, without convoy, at a distance of 7 miles out from the mouth of the
harbor, and with the naval crew alone in her.
Here is what Admiral Dewey says in a letter to Senator STEW-
ART:
Replying to the first of the questions which y:mpropound,viz, whether or
not in view of the favorable reports made by officers of the Navy upon the
U. S. S. Holland since she has been in the possession of the Government, I
agreewiththose officersastothegreat value of thi"' type of boats for harbor
and coast defense, I have to state thatI do, and thatmy opinionas toits value
has not changed since my testimony before the House Committee on Naval
Affairs in April last.
What did Admiral Dewey say at that time? Let me read it:
Gentlemen, I saw the operation of the boat down off .Mount Vernon the
other day. Several members of this committeewere there. I thinkwe were
all very much impressed with its performance. My aid, Lieutenant Cald-
well, was on board. He could tell, if necessary, what was done from the in-
sidfl. The boat did everything that the owners proposed to do. And I said
then, and I have said it since, that if they had had two of those things in Ma-
nila Bay, I never could ha>e held it with the squadron I had.
The moral effect-to my mind it is infinitely superior to mines or tor-
pedoes or anything of the kind. Witll those craft movina under water it
would wear people out. With two of those in Galveston, allthe naviesof the
world could not blockade that place. I agree with the resolution of Mr.
CmrniNOS. I think it would be money well spent. I think it would tend to
keep peace. 'l'hat is what we want a navy for. We wantpeace.
And, Mr. Speaker, if we can have peace with three submarine
boats, at an expense of $500,000, as against four battle ships and
cruisers at an expense of over $20,000,000, I say, in God's name,
and in the name of the taxpayer, take the submarine boats.
Here let me read extracts from a letter from Lieutenant Cald-
well, formerly of Dewey's staff, now in command of the Holland.
It was written on January 12, 1901, to my colleague on the com-
mittee, the Hon. R. B. HAWLEY. He says:
The HoUand has been undAr my charge from June 25, 1900, to the present
time. Her longest submerged run was about lr miles. I consider her dura-
ble, habitable, and reliable as a. vessel of war for coast and harbor defense.
During the late combined maneuvers of the fleet, shore defenses, and the
torpedo flotilla the Holland made a successful attack upon the fleet at night
by herself, without convoy, at a distance of 7miles out from the mouth of
the harbor and with the naval crew alone in her. The Holland was under
my command. She left the torpedo station at sundown and was placed in a
partially submerged condition, with the turret and about6inchesof the hull
above water,readyto dive at short notice. Cruisedin thisconditiontosouth-
ward and eastward of Brentons R-eef light-ship. Sighted two vessels of
XXXIV-194
blookadingfleet and fired.torpedo signal at them. but was not answered,and
thev disappeared before I could ascertain their identity.
About 9 p. m., about 7 miles south-southeast from harbor entrance,
sighted U. S. S. Kearsa:rge within range and fired torpedo signal. Fo~owed
her and, getting within 100 yards without being discovered, showed light,
hailed her. and informed her commanding officer that she had been tor-
pedoed. The Holland was not seen by any vessel of the blockading fleet or
torpedo boat, allhough she was within torpedo range of three of the former
and !'e>eral of the latU>r. I consider tllat the attack was a success, because
the HoUand could in all probability have torpedoed three blockading vessels
withont being- discovered.
I believe that I could sink one or more vessels of a blockading fleet or else
make them keep so far away as to make the blockadA ineffective.
With six of the Holland boats under my command, having trained crews
composed of American men and officered by men of my own selection, I be-
lieve I could break a blockade of New York Citymade by 15 ships of war. I
would do it by direct night attacks, approaching the fleet from different di-
rections m partially submerged condition and diving when discovered. If
the fleet keptunderway, by lying in wait at different points of its course or
accompanymg a decoy blockade runner.
Such, Mr. Speaker, is the opinion of officers who are in charge
of the boat and who are entil·ely conversantwith its merits.
Mr. GAINES. How much do these boats cost?
M.r. CUMMINGS. A hundred and seventy thousand dollars
each. And right here let me talk to you upon this question of
cost.
Mr. HOPKINS. \Vhat does theSecretaryof the Navysay upon
that·~
Mr. CUMMINGS. The price is made by the Secretary of the
Navy, but limited to $170,000. I read an extract from a report of
the Board of Construction sent to Chairman Foss, dated January
2, 1!:00. It says:
AB regards the cost of the present boats, namely, $170,0CoQ each, the board
is of the opinion that if the cost of construction, with a reasonable profit to
the contractors. i."' alone considered, it is a. very high price; but if the ex-
penses of the company in developing the boat are taken into consideration,
the price is not es:.cessive.
Now, as to the question of desirability, the Secretary of the
Navy, on January 9, lSOl, also gave the chairman of the com·
mittee information on that point. He said:
The question with the Department is not so much the desirability of sub-
marine boats. Thi"' may be regarded as largely settled by the fact that one
is now in commission and ha.s given promise of great possible efficiency, and
that seven more have been authorized by actof Congress and are nowinproc-
ess or construction.
This speaks for itself and indicates that the Secretary is in ac·
cord with Admiral Dewey.
Mr. WM. ALDEN SMITH. Will the gentleman allow me to
ask him a question?
Mr. CUMMINGS. Certainly.
Mr. WM. ALDEN SMITH. I seeinlooking over the testimony
that was taken by the Committee on Naval Affairs that Admiral
Hichborn said in answer to a question of Mr. VANDIVER whether
he con~dered the Holland boat improved, he answered, "Yes,
sir; the Holland to-day is an improvement on anything that has
ever been built in the history of the world;" and fm·ther on, I
think that in reply to a question of the gentleman fromNewYork
Admiralllichborn replied that he regarded it as the most suc-
cessful weapon that could be put in the hands of the Americ..'ln
Navy.
Mr. CUMMINGS. That is true. I was about to call attention
to it.
Mr. GAINES. Mr. Speaker, I am informed that the Govern-
ment already owns either six or eight of these vessels.
Mr. CUMMINGS. It is building seven; it owns one.
M.r. GAINES. Where are they?
Mr. CUMMINGS. The seven boats, or six boats, will be com·
pleted according to contract in the time agreed to, and be here in
Washington during the latter part of April, and this amendment
of the Senate simply provides that if they fulfill the requirements
and are satisfactory to the Secretary of the Navy he shall build
three more.
Mr. CANNON. How long does it take one of the shipyards to
build one of these boats, under a stress?
Mr. CUMMINGS. Nineor ten months.
Mr. CANNON. Ordinarily, or working under a stress?
Mr. CUMMINGS. I do not think you can bnildone of them in
le s~han nine months, possibly seven.
Now, here is the testimony of Lieut..Commander Wainwright,
Superintendent of .the Naval Academy at Annapolis:
M.r. CUIDUNGS. You have the submarine boat at Annapolis?
Commander WAINWRIGHT. Yes, sir.
Mr. CUMMINGS. How long has she been there?
Commander WAIXWRIGHT. About two months, I think.
Mr. CUMMINGS. Have you had anyexperience with her.
Commander W.AINWlliGHT. Yes, sir; I went down on her. We went out
into the bay.
1\fr. CUMMINGS. How far?
Commander WAJNWRIGHT. Out into deep water.
Mr. CUMMINGS. Six or seven miles?
Commander WA.INWRIGHT. Five or 6miles.
Mr. CUIDIINGS. How did she work?
Commander W.A.INWRIGHT. Beautifully. I was very much surprised. I
followed the boat for a good many years, the plans as they were growing,